
cell_computation.py
===================

-  `Overview <#overview>`__
-  `Example on 2D uni field unit cell
   computation <#example-on-2d-uni-field-unit-cell-computation>`__
-  `Concepts in implementation <#concepts-in-implementation>`__
-  `Simulation Template <#simulation-template>`__

Overview
---------

This is the main part of the module consisting of class
``MicroComputation`` and several assisting functions which concern about setup
of the solver parameters, generation of extended strains and initiation of field variables for
multiple field problems.

Example on 2D uni field unit cell computation
----------------------------------------------

-  **Module import**

.. code:: python

    from dolfin import *
    
    import numpy as np
    
    import sys
    sys.path.append('../')
    
    import cell_geom as geom
    import cell_material as mat
    import cell_computation as comp

-  **Choose linear backend**

The embedded backends can be viewed through
``linear_algebra_backend()``, namely *Eigen*, *PETSc* (default), and
*STL*. Notice that the backend should be specified at the beginning of
all the calculation and initialization, as the corresponding matrix and
vector objects are casted in a style appropriate for the chosen backend.

.. code:: python

    ## Linear Backend
    parameters['linear_algebra_backend'] = 'PETSc'

-  **Define unit cell geometry (mesh, inclusions)**

The geometrical properties are set according to the `manual on cell_geom.py <Manual%20on%20cell_geom.py.html#overview>`__. Inclusions such as circle and rectangular in 2D and 3D
are available. Extensions are possible in this context. Mesh can be
imported the same as in *FEniCS*.

.. code:: python

    ## Define Geometry
    mesh = Mesh(r'../m_fine.xml')
    cell = geom.UnitCell(mesh)
    
    # Add inclusion
    inc = geom.InclusionCircle(2, (0.5, 0.5), 0.25)
    inc_di = {'circle_inc': inc}
    cell.set_append_inclusion(inc_di)

-  **Define materials in composites**

The material properties are set according to the `manual on
cell_material.py <Manual%20on%20cell_material.py.html#overview>`__.
Three types of materials are provided in the material libraries. Users
can also specify their own materials. The definition of a new material
follows the steps,
     1. free energy function ``psi``, 
     2. invariant relations with physical variables, 
     3. initialize an instance of ``Material`` with ``psi`` and required parameters, 
     4. append invariant relations to the ``Material`` instance
     5. call this instance with the physical field variables and complete instantiation

Details and restrictions are referred in `manual on
cell\_material.py <Manual%20on%20cell_material.py.html#overview>`__.

.. code:: python

    ## Define Material
    E_m, nu_m, E_i, nu_i = 10.0, 0.3, 1000.0, 0.3
    mat_m = mat.st_venant_kirchhoff(E_m, nu_m)
    mat_i = mat.st_venant_kirchhoff(E_i, nu_i)
    
    mat_li = [mat_m, mat_i]

-  **Create MicroComputation instance (pre-processing)**

Here a general relation between the physical field variable and strain
is given. This is realized in the function ``deform_grad_with_macro``.
``w`` stands for the fluctuation that needs to be solved, while ``F`` is
a general strain measure, which are considered in the material total
energy. ``F_bar`` is the general strain from macro computation serving
as input for ``MicroComputation``.

The instantiation steps are as follows 
  1. Function spaces for physical field variables and generate Functions for field variables. These fiel variables are often regarded as general displacements, and in ``MicroComputation`` they are fluctuation to solve. 
  2. Define relation between general strains and general displacements. 
  3. Give function space for general strain, these are for the post processing. 
  4. Initialize a ``MicroComputation`` instance using geometry (``cell``), materials (``mat_li``), general strain-displacement relation (``deform_grad_with_macro``), and the strain function space for post-processing (``strain_space``). 
  5. Specify general strain from macro field and input them into instance of ``MicroComputation``. It completes the creation a ``MicroComputation``

.. code:: python

    ## Define Computation
    # Step 1: Field variables
    VFS = VectorFunctionSpace(cell.mesh, "CG", 1, 
                              constrained_domain=geom.PeriodicBoundary_no_corner(2))
    w = Function(VFS)
    
    # Step 2: Strain and field variable relations
    def deform_grad_with_macro(F_bar, w_component):
        return F_bar + grad(w_component)
    
    # Step 3: Strain space for post processing
    strain_space = TensorFunctionSpace(mesh, 'DG', 0)
    
    # Step 4: Initialization
    compute = comp.MicroComputation(cell, mat_li, 
                                    [deform_grad_with_macro],
                                    [strain_space])
    # Step 5: Complete instantiation
    F_bar = [0.9, 0., 0., 1.]
    compute.input([F_bar], [w])

-  **Solve fluctuation**

It begins with setting of solver parameters. The solving step is just
call the member function of this instance ``comp_fluctuation()``

There are two classes of methods, *direct* (lu solver) and *iterative*
(krylov solver). To list the solvers in direct methods, command
``lu_solver_methods()``, while for listing iterative method solvers
command is ``krylov_solver_methods()``. For iterative solvers a
preconditioner is needed, which can be viewed using command
``krylov_solver_preconditioners()``. A complete summary of solvers can
be referred in the `website of
PETSc <http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc/documentation/linearsolvertable.html>`__.

.. code:: python

    # Parameters for solving of fluctuation
    comp.set_solver_parameters('non_lin_newton', lin_method='direct', linear_solver='mumps')

The solver parameters are showed as follows,

.. parsed-literal::

    .-------------------.
    | Solver Parameters |
    .-------------------.
    direct method is used

The fluctuation computation step is 

.. code:: python

    compute.comp_fluctuation(print_progress=True, print_solver_info=False)

which gives the result,

.. parsed-literal::

    fluctuation computation finished


-  **Post Processing and view the results**

Calculation of homogenized quantity is the central part of
homogenization method. Hence various post processing of the
``MicroComputation`` result are implemented in this class. These are
``comp_strain()``, ``comp_stress()`` in terms of calculating general
strain and stress in the unit cell, ``avg_merge_strain()``,
``avg_merge_stress()``, ``avg_merge_moduli()`` in terms of calculating
the averaged quantities in a unit cell, and ``effective_moduli_2()`` for
calculating the homogenized tangent moduli.

``effective_moduli_2()`` is the most consuming part. Specifying a good
solver for it can speed up this process. This is involved with using
function ``set_post_solver_parameters()``.

Visualizing the results are also realized in the current module.
Wrapping the visualization tools in *FEniCS* is included. The member
functions are ``view_fluctuation()``, ``view_displacement()``, and
``view_post_processing()``. When multiple fields are considered,
specifying the component of visualization is needed.

When the following methods are invoked,

.. code:: python

    compute.comp_strain()
    compute.comp_stress()
    compute.avg_merge_strain()
    compute.avg_merge_stress()
    compute.avg_merge_moduli()

the corresponding results will be,

.. parsed-literal::

    strain computation finished
    strain computation finished
    stress computation finished
    average merge strain computation finished
    average merge stress computation finished
    average merge moduli computation finished

    array([[  2.68263384e+02,  -1.47306216e-02,   1.45226354e-02,
              1.16307090e+02],
           [ -1.47306216e-02,   7.64588022e+01,   7.75364924e+01,
             -1.46396985e-02],
           [  1.45226354e-02,   7.75364924e+01,   7.64302939e+01,
              1.44729548e-02],
           [  1.16307090e+02,  -1.46396985e-02,   1.44729548e-02,
              2.72444929e+02]])

For effective tangent moduli, 

.. code:: python

    # Post processing solver parameters
    comp.set_post_solver_parameters(lin_method='iterative',)
    
    # Homogenized tangent moduli
    compute.effective_moduli_2()


.. parsed-literal::

    +----------------------------+
    | Post Processing Parameters |
    +----------------------------+
    iterative method is used
    a valid preconditioner should be provided
    average merge moduli computation finished

    array([[  1.05215604e+01,   6.81100019e-04,   8.10922941e-04,
              6.09319740e+00],
           [  6.81100019e-04,   3.03957695e+00,   4.12022593e+00,
             -2.43801203e-04],
           [  8.10922941e-04,   4.12022593e+00,   2.98311033e+00,
             -3.19622254e-04],
           [  6.09319740e+00,  -2.43801203e-04,  -3.19622254e-04,
              1.74423266e+01]])

And for visualization,

.. code:: python

    # View results
    compute.view_fluctuation()
    compute.view_displacement()
    compute.view_post_processing('strain', (0,1))
    compute.view_post_processing('stress', (0,1))

-  **Call help for each functions**

Note that in-code docstrings are given to explain functions arguments
and outputs. Calling docstrings in IPython is simply add a question mark
behind a function, and two question marks will show the detailed
implementation the method. In Python context, ``help()`` is used to list
the docstring.

Calling 

.. code:: python

    help(compute.comp_fluctuation)

gives

.. parsed-literal::

    Help on method comp_fluctuation in module cell_computation:
    
    comp_fluctuation(self, print_progress=False, print_solver_info=False) method of cell_computation.MicroComputation instance
        Solve fluctuation, solver parameters are set before solving
        
        :param print_progress: (bool) print detailed solving progress
        :param print_solver_info: (bool) print detailed solver info
        
        :return: updated self.w_merge
    
This example can work as a `Simulation Template <#simulation-template>`__ listed at the end of this manual.

Concepts in implementation
--------------------------

The design concepts of this module are elaborated in this part. The main
idea of the ``MicroComputation`` is to establish a unit cell. When the
deformation or field variables from macro state are input, micro state
computation can be realized. This computation will fall into several
parts such as solving fluctuation, and in the end calculation of effective
tangent moduli.

If the geometry and materials of this unit cell does not change. This
instance of ``MicroComputation`` can be reused for another computation.
This will make ``MicroComputation`` act like a factory that produce the
result of computation in the micro scale.

Various functions and member methods are targeted to achieve this
computation.

-  **Initializtion**

When an instance is initialized, several methods are called behind
scene. Once ``input()`` is called, the instance is complete. Arguments
for ``input()`` are ``F_bar_li`` and ``w_li`` representing the macro
field input and to be solved fluctuation respectively. In ``input()``
``F_bar_li`` is transformed to a list of Functions suitable for the
later formulation done by ``_F_bar_init()``. ``set_field()`` is called
to merge and split fields for the variational formulaiton later on. Then
general strain measures are created through ``extend_strain()`` also for
the later formulation, where the input is the splitted *FEniCS*
Functions.

-  **Pre-processing**

Pre-processing is the problem formulation stage. ``_total_energy()`` is
to insert general strains into materials to construct its dependency
within the physical fields. The summation of all the free enerygies of
every material components in composite make the total energy complete.

Then boundary condition is provided with ``_bc_fixed_corner()``, which
fixes all the corners of the unit cell.

``_fem_formulation_composite`` follows with derivation of the nonlinear
problem using powerful functions defined in *FEniCS*, ``derivative()``

-  **Solving**

Solving step is accomplished by ``comp_fluctuation()`` with previously
specified solver parameters.

-  **Post-processing**

Post-processing plays the key role in homogenization problem. It starts
with ``comp_strain``, where convenient *FEniCS* function ``project()``
is used. Then material energy is updated with the calculated general
strains in ``_energy_update()``. It is for the purpose that, general
stresses are conjugated part in the total energy. Formulating the total
energy in general strain will lead to direct calculation of general
stresses with the help of ``derivative()``. It is done by
``comp_stress()``.

``avg_merge_strain()``, ``avg_merge_stress()``, and
``avg_merge_moduli()`` are implemented using the trick of multiplying
trial and test functions defining on a constant Function Space. Detailed
elaboration is given in the report.

``effective_moduli_2()`` is based on ``avg_merge_moduli()``, a LTKL term
is subtracted from the averaged merged moduli. The calculation of this
term is realized in ``sensitivity()``. L matrix is assembled with
boundary conditions. Some techniques are taken in imposing the boundary
conditions. Using the *FEniCS* ``solve()`` on ``K_a`` and ``L[:, i]``
gives a intermediate result. Left multiplying with the transpose of L
gives the required term.

-  **Things to notice**

In the module only the relation between mechanical displacement and
deformation gradient is given in the function
``deform_grad_with_macro``, other kinds of relation between general
strain and displacement should be specified by the user.

Another thing to notice is that a good solver needs to be chosen in
complicated cases such as multi field or 3D. Direct solvers are rather
slow in these circumstances.However iterative solvers do not always
converge and require a lot of try-outs with the right preconditioners.

Simulation Template
-------------------

.. code:: python

    from dolfin import *
    
    import numpy as np
    
    import sys
    sys.path.append('../')
    
    import cell_geom as geom
    import cell_material as mat
    import cell_computation as comp
    
    ## Linear Backend
    
    parameters['linear_algebra_backend'] = 'Eigen'
    
    ## Define Geometry
    
    mesh = Mesh(r'../m_fine.xml')
    
    cell = geom.UnitCell(mesh)
    
    # Add inclusion
    inc = geom.InclusionCircle(2, (0.5, 0.5), 0.25)
    inc_di = {'circle_inc': inc}
    cell.set_append_inclusion(inc_di)
    
    ## Define Material
    
    E_m, nu_m, E_i, nu_i = 10.0, 0.3, 1000.0, 0.3
    mat_m = mat.st_venant_kirchhoff(E_m, nu_m)
    mat_i = mat.st_venant_kirchhoff(E_i, nu_i)
    mat_li = [mat_m, mat_i]
    
    ## Define Computation
    
    VFS = VectorFunctionSpace(cell.mesh, "CG", 1, 
                              constrained_domain=geom.PeriodicBoundary_no_corner(2))
    
    def deform_grad_with_macro(F_bar, w_component):
        return F_bar + grad(w_component)
    
    w = Function(VFS)
    strain_space = TensorFunctionSpace(mesh, 'DG', 0)
    compute = comp.MicroComputation(cell, mat_li, 
                                    [deform_grad_with_macro],
                                    [strain_space])
    
    F_bar = [0.9, 0., 0., 1.]
    
    compute.input([F_bar], [w])
    
    # comp.set_solver_parameters('non_lin_newton', lin_method='direct',
    #                       linear_solver='cholesky')
    
    compute.comp_fluctuation(print_progress=True, print_solver_info=False)
    
    compute.view_fluctuation()
    
    delta = 0.01
    
    for i in range(10):
        F_bar[0] -= delta
        print F_bar
        compute.input([F_bar], [w])
        compute.comp_fluctuation(print_progress=True, print_solver_info=False)

